ACTIVITY NAME: Molecular Polarity and Electrostatic Potential

GOALS

By completing this activity, students will:

- Represent atomic positions and partial charges numerically.
- Calculate atomic contributions to a molecular dipole.
- Determine the magnitude of a molecular dipole.
- Calculate an electrostatic potential across a two-dimensional grid.
- Visualize molecular electrostatic potential using Python.

EXPLANATION OF THE ACTIVITY

This activity investigates molecular polarity by combining atomic positions with partial charges.

The program uses a two-dimensional representation of an H2O molecule. Each atom is assigned a position and a partial charge. The charge and position of each atom are then used to calculate its contribution to the molecular dipole.

The program adds the individual contributions together to obtain the molecular dipole vector and calculates its magnitude.

The second part of the activity calculates an approximate electrostatic potential over a two-dimensional grid surrounding the molecule. The resulting values are displayed as a contour map, providing a visual representation of the molecule's electrostatic environment.

EXPLANATION OF NEW CODE

The activity introduces two-dimensional NumPy coordinate arrays:

oxygen = np.array([0.000, 0.000])
hydrogen1 = np.array([0.758, 0.504])
hydrogen2 = np.array([-0.758, 0.504])

Partial charges are stored as numerical variables:

q_oxygen = -0.84
q_hydrogen1 = 0.42
q_hydrogen2 = 0.42

A new function calculates an individual dipole contribution:

def dipole_component(position, charge):
    return position * charge

The contributions from the individual atoms are then added together to obtain the molecular dipole.

The magnitude of the resulting vector is calculated using:

dipole_magnitude = np.linalg.norm(dipole)

The activity then introduces a more complex function for calculating electrostatic potential:

def electrostatic_potential(x, y, positions, charges):

The function loops through each atomic position and charge using:

for position, charge in zip(positions, charges):

For every grid point, it calculates the distance from the atomic charge and uses that distance to determine the charge's contribution to the electrostatic potential.

The program also introduces np.linspace() and np.meshgrid():

x = np.linspace(-3, 3, 300)
y = np.linspace(-3, 3, 300)

X, Y = np.meshgrid(x, y)

These create a two-dimensional grid of points where the electrostatic potential is calculated.

Finally, Matplotlib's contourf() function is used to create the electrostatic-potential map:

contour = plt.contourf(
    X,
    Y,
    potential,
    levels=50
)

This converts the numerical electrostatic-potential data into a visual representation of the molecule's charge environment.
